Plato’s idea of temperance involves everyone in the State accepting – even liking – the very rigid class structure it is built upon, with rulers at the top, auxiliaries (soldiers) in the middle, and everyone else at the bottom. The members of the “bronze” class are not to interfere or try to become a member of the class of auxiliaries or the class of rulers. “This meddling of one with another is the ruin of the State.” I think Brave New World had to have taken some inspiration from this structure, with its genetically engineered caste system, where everyone is brainwashed into loving their particular position. But to Plato, this is justice in the State: every man doing his own part and not meddling with anyone else’s.

The definition of justice in the individual is this: Every soul is composed of three classes: the rational (rulers), the irrational or appetitive (everyone else), and the passion or spirit (auxiliaries). The individual possesses wisdom in the rational, and courageous in the passion or spirit, just like the states. A just individual is one “in whom the several qualities of his nature do their own work”. The wise rational principle will rule, with the passionate or spirited as its subject and ally, over the concupiscent (sensual). All these things are held in order and harmony by temperance.

But in reality justice was such as we were describing, being concerned, however, not with the outward man, but with the inward, which is the true self and concernment of man: for the just man does not permit the several elements within him to interfere with one another, or any of them to do the work of others – he sets in order his own inner life, and is his own master and his own law, and at peace with himself; and when he has bound together the three principles within him, which may be compared to the higher, lower, and middle notes of the scale, and the intermediate intervals – when he has bound all these together, and is no longer many, but has become one entirely temperate and perfectly adjusted nature, then he proceeds to act, if he has to act, whether in a matter of property, or in the treatment of the body, or in some affair of politics or private business; always thinking and calling that which preserves and co-operates with this harmonious condition just and good action, and the knowledge which presides over it wisdom, and that which at any time impairs this condition he will call unjust action, and the opinion which presides over it ignorance.

Book 5

Much has been made on the thoughts of Socrates about the role of women in his society, and for good reason: he argues that the nature of a woman does not differ from a man “in reference to any of the pursuits or arts of civic life”. Therefore, women ought to receive the same sort of education and pursue the same things as men in this State. “The difference consists only in women bearing and men begetting children”. Suggesting otherwise would be like saying that only bald men should be cobblers, because their “nature” is different from that of hairy men! (Nevertheless, he maintains that women are overall inferior to men, which is too bad.) He says the current practice is “in reality a violation of nature.”

“The wives of our guardians are to be common, and their children are to be common, and no parent is to know his own child, nor any child his parent.” – Very Brave New World-y again. There’s even a breeding program to make sure only the best people are making babies. The government regulation of marriage and having kids reinforces the idea that this society regulates the powerful feelings and emotions of its citizens, then, again, the more “mundane” legislation flows from that. The purpose of this regulation, along with property being held in common, is to maintain a sense of unity among the ruling class and ensure that they are devoted to ruling instead of quarreling among one another.
